Why are you trying to distinguish
humans? Humans are animals. What we have
in common is more interesting. What
distinguishes us, we should be paying
less attention to.
>> I mean, we're trying to replicate
intelligence, right? No animal can go to
the moon or make semiconductors. So, we
want to understand what makes humans
special.
>> So, I like the way you consider that
obvious, cuz I consider the opposite
obvious. If we understood a squirrel,
we'd be almost all the way there. I am
personally just kind of content being
out of sync with my field for a long
period of time perhaps decades because
occasionally I have improved right in
the past. I don't think learning is
really about training. It's about an
active process. The child tries things
and sees what happens. I think we should
be proud that we are giving rise to this
great transition in the universe.
Today I'm chatting with Richard Sutton
who is one of the founding fathers of
reinforcement learning an inventor of
many of the main techniques used there
like TD learning and policy gradient
methods and for that he received this
year's touring award which if you don't
know is basically the Nobel Prize for
computer science Richard congratulations
>> thank you Darish
>> and uh thanks for coming on the podcast
>> it's my pleasure
>> okay so first question my audience and I
are familiar with the LLM way of
thinking about AI conceptually
What are we missing in terms of thinking
about AI from the RL perspective?
>> Well, yes, I think it's really quite a
different point of view and it's it can
easily get separated and lose the
ability to talk to each other.
>> Mhm.
>> And um yeah, large language models have
become such a big thing. Generative AI
in general a big thing. Um and our field
is subject to bandwagons and fashions.
So we lose we lose track of the uh basic
basic things because I consider
reinforcement learning to be basic AI
and what is intelligence are the problem
is is to understand your world and um
reinforcement learning is about
understanding your world whereas large
language models are about mimicking
people doing what people say you should
do. They're not about figuring out what
to do.
>> Huh. I guess you would think that to
emulate the trillions of tokens in the
corpus of internet text, you would have
to build a world model. In fact, these
models do seem to have very robust world
models and they're the best um world
models we've made to date in AI. Right.
So, what do you think that that's
missing?
>> I would disagree with most of the things
you just said.
>> Great.
>> Just to mimic the the what people say is
not really to build a model of the world
at all. I don't think you know you're
mimicking things that have a model of
the world the people
>> but I don't want to approach the
question in an adversarial way
uh but but I would I would question the
idea that they um they have a world
model so a world model would enable you
to predict what would happen
>> right
>> they they have they have the ability to
predict what a person would say they
don't have the ability to predict what
will happen what we want I think to
quote Alan Turing what we want is a
machine that can learn from experience,
>> right?
>> Where experience is the things that
actually happen in your life. You do
things, you see what happens. Um, and uh
that's what you learn from.
>> Yeah.
>> The large language models learn from
something else. They learn from here's a
situation and here's what a person did.
And implicitly the suggestion is you
should do what the person did.
>> Right? I guess maybe the the crux and
I'm curious if you disagree with this is
some people will say okay so this
imitation learning has given us a good
prior or given these models a good prior
but reasonable ways to approach problems
and as we move towards the era of
experience uh as you call it this prior
is going to be the basis on which we
teach these models from experience
because this gives them the opportunity
to get uh answers right some of the time
and then on this you can build uh you
can train them on experience. Do you
agree with that perspective?
>> No, I I I agree that it's the it's the
large language model perspective, right?
>> I don't think it's a good perspective.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Cere.
>> So to be a prior for something, there
has to be a real thing. I mean, a prior
bit of knowledge should be the basis for
actual knowledge. What is actual
knowledge? There's no definition of
actual knowledge in that in that large
language framework. What makes an action
a good action to take? You recognize the
value, the need for continual learning,
right? So if you need to learn
continually, continually means learning
during the normal interaction with the
world.
>> Yeah.
>> And so then there must be some way
during the normal interaction to tell
what's right.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. So
is there any way for it to tell in the
largest language model setup to tell
what's the right thing to say? You will
say something and you will not get
feedback about what the right thing to
say is
>> because there's no definition of what
the right thing to say is. There's no
goal,
>> right?
>> And if there's no goal, then there's
there's one thing to say, another thing
to say. There's no right thing to say,
>> right?
>> So there's no ground truth. You can't
have prior knowledge if you don't have
ground truth because the prior knowledge
is supposed to be a hint or an initial
belief about what the truth is.
>> Yeah.
>> But there isn't any truth. there's no
right thing to say right now in
reinforcement learning there is a right
thing to say or right thing to do
because the the right thing to do is the
thing that gets you reward
>> right
>> so we have a definition of what the
right thing to do is and so we can have
uh prior knowledge or knowledge provided
by pe people about what the right thing
to do is and then we can check it
>> to see because because we have a
definition of what the actual right
thing to do is
>> now an even simpler case is when you
have you're trying to make a model of
the world when you predict what will
happen, you predict and then you see
what happens.
>> Okay? So there's ground truth. There's
no ground truth in in uh large language
models because you don't have a a
prediction about what will happen next.
If you say something in your in your um
conversation, there's the large language
models have no prediction about what the
person will say in response to that or
what what the response will be. I mean I
think they do like they you can
literally ask them what what what would
you anticipate a user might say in
response and they have a prediction.
>> Oh no they they they will respond to
that question right?
>> Yeah
>> but they have no prediction in the
substantive sense that they won't be
surprised by what happens and if
something happens that isn't what you
might say they predicted they will not
change because an unexpected thing has
happened and there to learn that they'd
have to make an adjustment. I I so I
think a capability like this does exist
in context. So it's interesting to watch
a model do chain of thought and then
suppose it's trying to solve a math
problem. It'll say okay I'm going to
approach this problem using this
approach at first and it'll write this
out and be like oh wait I just realized
this is the wrong conceptual way to
approach the problem. I'm going to
restart by this another approach and
that flexibility does exist in context,
right? Do you have something else in
mind or do you just think that you need
to extend this capability across longer
horizons?
>> I'm just saying they don't have a have a
uh in any meaningful sense they don't
have a prediction of what will happen
next and they will not be surprised by
what happened next. They'll not make any
changes if if something happens.
>> But isn't that isn't that isn't that
>> based on what happens.
>> Isn't that literally what next token
prediction is? prediction about what's
next and then updating on a surprise.
>> Next token is what they should say, what
the action should be. It's not what the
world will give them in response to what
they do. Let's let's go back to the uh
their lack of goal.
>> Mhm.
>> For me, having a goal is the essence of
intelligence,
>> right?
>> Something is intelligent if it can
achieve goals. Is I like John McCarthy's
definition that intelligence is the
computational part of the ability to
achieve goals. Yeah. So, you have to
have goals. You're you're not you're
just you're just you're just a behaving
system. You you're not you're not any
special. You're not intelligent.
>> Right.
>> And you agree that large language models
don't have goals.
>> I think they No, they have a goal.
>> What's the goal?
>> Next token prediction.
>> That's not a goal. Doesn't it doesn't
change the world,
you know.
>> I think tokens come at you and if you
predict them, you don't influence them.
>> Oh, yeah. I I it's not a goal about the
external world.
>> Yeah. It's not a goal.
It's not a substantive goal. It's not
You can't look at a system and say, "Oh,
it uh has a goal if it's just sitting
there predicting and being happy with
itself that it's predicting accurately."
I I guess maybe the bigger question I
want you want to understand is why you
don't think doing RL on top of LLM is a
productive direction because being we we
seem to be able to give these models a
goal of solving difficult math problems
and they're in many ways um at the very
peaks of human level in in the capacity
to solve math olympia type problems
right they got gold at IMO so it seems
like the model which got gold at the
international math Olympia does have the
goal of getting math problems right Um
so why can't we extend this to different
domains?
>> Well the math problems are different. Um
the making a model of the physical world
and uh carrying out the consequences of
mathematical
um assumptions or operations,
>> right?
>> Those are very different things like the
the empirical world has to be learned.
You have to learn the consequences. Um
whereas the uh the math is is more just
computational. It's more like standard
planning. So, so there you can you can
um they can have a goal to to um uh to
find the proof and they are in in some
way given that goal to find the proof.
>> Right. So, I mean, it's interesting
because you wrote this essay in 2019
titled The Bitter Lesson, and this is
the most influential essay perhaps in
the history of AI, but people have used
that as a justification
for scaling up LLMs because in their
view, this is the one scalable way we
have found to pour ungodly amounts of
compute into learning about the world.
And so it's interesting that your
perspective is that the LLMs are
actually not bitter lesson.
>> It's an interesting question whether uh
large language models are are uh a case
of the bitter lesson.
>> Yeah.
>> Because they are clearly um a way of
using massive computation things that
will scale with computation up to up to
the limits of the internet.
>> Yeah.
uh but they're also a way of putting in
lots of um human knowledge and uh so so
this is an interesting question um it's
a sociological or industry question uh
will they reach the limits of of of the
data and and be superseded by things
that that are can get more data just
from experience rather than from
uh from people. Uh in some ways it's a
classic case of the of the of the bitter
lesson with the more the more human
knowledge we put into the large language
models the better they can do and so it
feels good. Um
and yet uh one well I in particular
expect there to be systems that can
learn from experience and which could
well perform much much better and be
much more scalable. In which uh case it
will be another instance of the bitter
lesson that the things that that used
human knowledge were eventually
superseded by things that just um
trained from uh experience and
computation. I I guess that doesn't seem
like the crux to me because I think
those people would also agree that the
overwhelming amount of compute in the
future will come from uh learning from
experience. They just think that the
scaffold or the basis of that the thing
you'll start with in order to pour in
the compute to do this future
experiential learning or on the job
learning will be LLMs. And so I I guess
I I still don't understand why this is
the wrong starting point altogether. Why
we need a whole new architecture to
begin doing experential continual
learning. Uh and why we can't start with
LLMs to do that.
>> Well, in every case the bitter lesson,
you know, you could start with uh human
knowledge,
>> right?
>> And then just and then do the scalable
things.
>> Yeah,
>> that's always the case. And there's no
never any reason why that has to be bad,
>> right?
>> But in fact and in practice it has
always turned out to be bad because
people get locked into the human
knowledge approach and they
psychologically or you know now I'm now
I'm speculating why it is but this is
what has always happened.
>> Yeah.
>> That uh yeah they get they get their
lunch gets eaten by the methods that are
truly scalable.
>> Yeah. Give me a sense of what the
scalable method is. The scalable method
is you learn from experience. Um you uh
you you try things, you see what you see
what works. No one no one has to tell
you. First of all, you have a goal. So
without a goal, uh there's no sense of
right or wrong or better or worse. So
large language models are trying to get
by without having a goal or a sense of
better or worse. That's just, you know,
it's exactly starting in the wrong
place. May maybe it's um interesting to
compare this to humans. So in both the
case of learning from imitation versus
experience and on the question of goals,
I think there's some interesting
analogies. So you know kids will
initially learn from imitation. Uh you
don't think so?
>> No, of course not.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. I think kids just like watch
people. They like kind of try try to
like say the same.
>> How old are those these kids?
>> I I think the level
>> What about the first six months?
>> I think they're kind kind of imitating
things. They're trying to like make
their mouth sound the way they see their
mother's mouth sound. And then they'll
say the same words without understanding
what they mean. And as you get older,
the complexity of the imitation they do
increases. So that's you're you're
you're you know, you're imitating maybe
the skills that your uh people in your
band are using to hunt down the deer or
something. And then you go into the
learning from experience RL regime. But
I think there's a lot of imitation
learning happening with uh humans.
>> Yeah. Surprising. Yeah. You can have
such a different point of view.
>> Yeah.
>> Um when I see kids, I see kids uh just
trying things and like waving their
hands around and moving their eyes
around and no one no one tells them
there. There's no there's no um
imitation for uh how they move their
eyes around or even the sounds they
make. They may they may want to create
the same sounds but the um the actions
you know the thing that the uh infant
actually does there there's no targets
for that there are no examples for that
>> I agree that it doesn't explain
everything infants do but I think it
guides a learning process I mean even
LLM when it's trying to predict the next
token early in training it will like
make a guess it'll be different from
what like it actually sees and in some
sense it's like very short horizon RL
where it's like making this guess of
like I think this token will be It's
actually this other thing similar to how
a kid will try to say a word, it comes
out wrong.
>> The the large language models is
learning from training data. It's not
learning from experience.
It's it's learning from something that
will never be available during its
normal life.
There's never any uh training data that
says you should do this action in normal
life.
>> I I think this is maybe more of a
semantic distinction like what do you
call school? Is that not training data?
You're not like going to school because
it's like
>> school is much later. Okay, I shouldn't
have said never, but but I I don't know.
I think I would even say it about
school, but formal schooling is is the
exception. You should base your
>> of learning where I think you're just
sort of programming in your biology that
like early on you're not that useful and
then like kind of why you exist is to
understand the world and like learn how
to interact with it. Um, and seems kind
of like a training phase. I agree that
then there's like a sort of more gradual
there's not a sharp cut off to like
training to deployment, but there seems
to be this like initial training phase,
right? There's nothing where where you
have training of what you should do.
There's nothing you you you see things
that happen. You're not you're not told
what to do.
Don't don't don't be difficult. I mean,
this is obvious.
>> I mean, you're like literally taught
what to do. This is like where the word
training comes from is from humans,
right?
>> So I don't think uh learning is really
about training. I think learning is
about about learning. It's about an
active process. The child tries things
and sees what happens.
>> Right.
>> Yeah. It does not
we don't think we don't think about
training when we think of the an infant
growing up. These these things are
actually rather well understood. If you
go to look about how psychologists think
about learning, there's nothing like uh
imitation. Maybe there are some extreme
cases where humans might do that or
appear to do that, but there's no basic
animal learning process called
imitation. There basic animal learning
processes for prediction and for trial
and error control. I mean, it's really
interesting how sometime the most
hardest things to see are the obvious
ones. It's obvious um if you just look
at animals and how they learn and you
look at psychology and how our theories
of them um it's obvious that that
supervised learning is not part of uh
the way animals learn. We don't have we
don't have examples of desired behavior.
What we have is examples of things that
happened, things one things that
followed another and we have examples of
we did something and and and
there were consequences but there are no
examples of supervised learning. I mean
there are no supervised learning is not
something that that happens in nature
and you know school even if that was the
case you know we should forget about it
because it's it's just this that's some
special thing that happens in people.
doesn't happen broadly in nature and you
know squirrels don't go to school.
Squirrels can learn all about the world.
It's absolutely obvious I would say that
um supervised learning doesn't happen in
animals. So I I I interviewed this
psychologist and anthropologist Joseph
Henrik who has done work about cultural
evolution and basically how did what you
know what distinguishes humans and how
do humans pick up knowledge. Why are you
trying to distinguish humans?
Humans are animals.
What we have in common is more
interesting. What we have what
distinguished us we we should be paying
less attention to.
>> I mean we're trying to replicate
intelligence, right? So if you want to
understand what is it that
>> enables humans to go to the moon or to
build semiconductors. I think the thing
we want to understand is the thing that
makes it no animal can go to the moon or
make semiconductors. So we want to
understand what makes humans special.
>> So I like the way you consider that
obvious cuz I consider the opposite
obvious.
Yeah. I think we we need to we we have
to we have to understand how we are
animals and we if we understood a
squirrel I think we'd have a we'd be
almost all the way there to
understanding human intelligence. The
the language part is just a a small
veneer on the surface.
Okay. So this is great. You know we're
finding out the very different ways that
we're thinking.
>> We're not arguing. We're trying to share
share our different ways of thinking
with each other.
>> Yeah. And you I think argument is
useful. So um uh yeah but I do want to
complete this thought. So Joseph Henrik
has this interesting theory that uh if
you look a lot of the uh skills that
humans have had to master in order to be
successful and we're not talking about
you know last thousand years or last
10,000 years but hundreds of thousands
of years. uh you know the world is
really complicated and it's not possible
to reason through how to let's say hunt
a uh seal if you're living in the
Arctic. And so there's this many many
stepong process of how to make the bait
and how to find the seal and then how to
process the food in a way that make sure
you won't get poisoned. And it's not
possible to reason through all of that.
And so over time, yes, there's this like
larger process of whatever analogy you
want to use, maybe something else where
culture as a whole has figured out how
to uh find and kill and eat uh seals.
But then what is happening when through
generations this knowledge is
transmitted is in his view that like
there you just have to imitate your
elders in order to learn that skill
because you can't you can't think your
way through how to hunt and kill and
process a seal. You have to just watch
other people maybe make tweaks and
adjustments. Uh and that's how cultural
knowledge accumulates. But the the
initial step of the cultural gain has to
be imitation. But maybe you think about
it a different way.
>> No, I think about it the same way.
>> Okay. But still it's a small thing on
top of basic trial and error learning,
>> prediction learning, and it's what
distinguishes us perhaps from from many
animals.
>> But we're an animal first.
>> Yeah.
>> And and we were an animal before we had
language and all those other things. I
do think you make a very interesting
point that continual learning is a
capability that most mammals have. I
guess all mammals have. So it's quite
interesting that we have something that
all mammals have but our AI systems
don't have, right? Whereas maybe like
the ability to understand math and
solves difficult math problems depends
on how you define math. But like these
this is a capability our AIs have but
that no almost no animal has. And so
it's quite interesting what ends up
being difficult and what ends up being
easy.
>> Morix paradox.
>> That's right.
>> For the era of experience to commence,
we're going to need to train AIs in
complex real world environments. But
building effective RL environments is
hard. You can't just hire a software
engineer and have them write a bunch of
cookie cutter validation tests. Real
world domains are messy. You need deep
subject matter experts to get the data,
the workflows, and all the subtle rules
right. When one of Labelbox's customers
wanted to train an agent to shop online,
Labelbox assembled a team with a ton of
experience engineering internet
storefronts. For example, the team built
a product catalog that could be updated
during the episode because most shopping
sites have constantly changing state.
They also added a Reddis cache to
simulate stale data since that's how
real e-commerce sites actually work.
These are the kinds of things that you
might not have naively thought to do,
but that label box can anticipate. These
details really matter. Small tweaks are
often the difference between cool demos
and agents that can actually operate in
the real world. So whether it's
correcting traces that you already
produced or building an entirely new
suite of environments, Labelbox can help
you turn your RL projects into working
systems. Reach out at
labelbox.com/thearcash.
All right, back to Richard.
>> This alternative paradigm that you're
imagining,
>> the experential paradigm, let's lay out
a little bit what it is. It says that
experience action sensation well
sensation action reward and this happens
on and on and on makes for life. It's it
says that this is the uh foundation and
the focus of intelligence. Intelligence
is about taking that stream and altering
the actions to increase the the rewards
in the stream.
>> Right? So learning then is from the
stream and learning is about the stream.
So it's that that second part is is is
particularly telling you know that what
you learn your knowledge your knowledge
is about the stream. Your knowledge is
about if you do some action what will
happen or it's about uh which events
will follow other events. It's about the
stream. It's the content of the
knowledge is is statements about the
stream. Um, and so because it it's it's
a statement about the stream, you can
test it by comparing it to the stream
and you can learn it continually.
>> So when you're imagining this future
continual learning agent,
>> they're not future. Of course, we they
exist all all the time. It's I mean this
is what reinforcement learning paradigm
is learning from experience.
>> Yeah, I guess the maybe I what I meant
to say is uh human level general
continual learning agent.
>> What is the reward function? Is it just
predicting the world? Is it uh is it
then having a specific effect on it?
What would the general reward function
be?
>> The reward uh function is arbitrary
and um so if you're playing chess, it's
to win the game of chess.
If you were to um uh if you're a
squirrel, maybe the the reward has to do
with getting nuts,
>> right?
Um in general for an animal you would
say the reward is to avoid pain and to
acquire pleasure
>> right
>> uh
and there's also would be a component
having to do with uh I think there would
be should be a component having to do
with your uh increasing understanding of
your of your environment that would be
sort of an intrinsic motivation.
>> I see. I guess this AI would be deployed
to like lots of people would want it to
be doing lots of different kinds of
things,
>> right? So it's performing the task
people want but at the same time it's
learning about the world from doing that
task and do you do you imagine okay so
we get rid of this paradigm where
there's training periods and then
there's deployment periods but then is
there do we also get rid of this
paradigm when there's the model and then
instances of the model or copies of the
model that are you know doing certain
things h how do you think about the fact
that there we'd want this thing to be
doing different things, we'd want to
aggregate the knowledge that it's
gaining from doing those different
things.
>> I don't like the word model when used
the way you just did. I I think a better
word would be the network. So, I think
you mean the the network. Maybe there's
many networks. So anyway, things would
be learned and then you'd have copies
and many instances and sure you'd want
to share knowledge across the uh
instances and there would be lots of
possibilities for doing that like there
is not today. You can't have one child
learn grow up and and learn about the
world and then and then every new child
has to repeat that process. Whereas with
AIS, with a digital intelligence, you
could hope to do it once and then copy
it into the next one as a starting
place.
>> Right?
>> So this would be a huge savings and I
think actually it would be much more
important than uh trying to learn from
people.
>> I agree that the kind of thing you're
talking about is necessary regardless of
whether you start from LLMs or not.
Right? If you want human or animal level
intelligence, you're going to need this
capability. Suppose a human is trying to
make a startup, right? And this is a
thing which has a reward on the order of
10 years. Once in 10 years, you might
have an exit where you get, you know,
paid out a billion dollars. But humans
have this ability to make intermediate
auxiliary rewards or have some way of
even when they have extremely rewards,
they can still make intermediate steps
having an understanding of like what the
next thing they're doing leads to this
grander goal we have. And so how do you
imagine such a process might play out
with AIS? So this is something we know
very well
>> and it's the basis of it is temporal
difference learning
>> where the same thing happens um in a
less grandiose scale like when you learn
to play chess you have the grand the
long-term goal is winning the game and
yet you you can't you um you want to be
able to learn from shorter term things
like you know taking the your opponent's
pieces um and so you do that by having a
value function which predicts the
long-term outcome right
>> and then if You take guys pieces where
your prediction about the long-term
outcome is changed. It goes up. You
think you're going to win and then that
increase in your in your belief
immediately quote reinforces the uh the
move that led to taking the piece.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. So, we have this long-term 10-year
goal of making a startup and making a
lot of money. And so, when we make
progress, we say, "Oh, I'm I'm I'm more
likely to uh achieve the long-term
goal." and that rewards the the steps
along the way,
>> right? And then you also want some
ability for information that you're
learning. I mean, one of the things that
makes humans quite different from these
LLMs is that if you're onboarding on a
job, you're you're picking up so much
context and information, and that's what
makes you useful at the job, right?
You're uh everything from how your
client has preferences to how the
company works to everything. Um, and is
the bandwidth of information that you
get from a procedure like TDLearning
high enough to have this like huge pipe
of like context and tacet knowledge that
you need to be picking up the way humans
do when they're when they're just like
deployed? Um
I think the crux of this and I'm not
sure but
the the big world hypothesis seems very
relevant and the reason why humans
becoming useful on their job is because
they are encountering the particular
part of the world. That's right. And um
and it can't have been anticipated and
it can't all have been put in in in
advance in in uh the world is so huge
that you can't the the dream as I see it
the dream of large language models is
you can teach the an the agent
everything and it will know everything
and it won't have to learn anything
online
>> right
>> during its life. Okay. and and your
examples are all well really you have to
because you can there's a lot to you can
teach it but there's all little
idiosyncrasies of the particular life
they're leading and the the particular
people they're working with and what
they like as opposed to what average
people like right
>> and so that's just saying the world is
really big and so you're going to have
to learn it uh along the way
>> yeah so it seems to me you need two
things one is some way of converting
this long run goal reward into smaller
auxiliary or you know um these like
predictive rewards of the future reward
or the future reward at least to the
final reward then you need some other
way initially it seems to me you need
some way of then okay I'm
I need to hold on to all this context
that I'm gaining as I'm
working in the world right I'm like
learning about
my clients my my company all this
information and I'm so I would say
you're just doing regular learning.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe you're using context because in
large language models, all that
information has to go into the context
window,
>> right?
>> But in in a continual learning setup, it
just goes into the weights.
>> Maybe maybe Yeah. So maybe context is
the wrong word to use because I mean a
more general thing.
>> You learn a policy that's specific to
the environment that you're finding
yourself in.
>> Yeah. So the question I'm trying to ask
is you need some way of getting like how
many bits per second are you picking
like is a human picking up when they're
you know out in the world, right? Um if
you're just like interacting over Slack
with your clients and everything.
>> So maybe you're trying to ask the
question of it seems like the reward is
too small of a thing to to do all the
learning that we need to do. But of
course we have the uh the sensations
uh we we have all the other information
we can learn from
>> right
>> we don't just learn from the reward we
learn from all the data
>> yeah so what is the learning process
which helps you capture that information
>> so now I want to talk about the base
common model of the agent with the four
parts
>> right
>> so we need a policy the policy says in
the situation I'm in what should I do we
need a value function. The value
function is the thing that is learned
with TDarning and the value function
produces a number. The number says how
well is it going
>> and then you watch if that's going up
and down and use that to adjust your
policy. Okay. So the those two things
and and then there's also the perception
component which is the construction of
your uh state representation. This your
sense of where you are now. And the
fourth one is what we're really getting
at most transparently. Anyway, the the
fourth one is the transition model of
the world. Um that's why I am
uncomfortable just calling everything
models because I want to talk about the
model of the world. The transition model
of the world, your belief that if you do
this, what will happen? What will be the
consequences of what you do? So your
physics of the world, but it's al not
just physics. It's also um abstract
models like you know your model of how
you traveled um from California up to
Edmonton for this podcast that was a
model and that's a transition model and
that would be
>> uh learned and it's not learned from
reward it's learned from you did things
you saw what happened
>> you made that model with the world that
is it will be learned very richly from
all the sensation that you receive not
just from the reward
>> it has to include the reward as well but
it's that's a small part of the whole
model small crucial part of the whole
model.
>> Yeah. One of my friends Toby Ward
pointed out that if you look at the Muse
Euro models that Google Deep Mind
deployed to learn Atari games that these
models were initially
not a general intelligence itself but a
general framework for training
specialized intelligences to play
specific games. That is to say that you
couldn't using that framework train a
policy to play both chess and go and
some other game. You had to train each
one in a specialized way. And he was
wondering whether that implies that
reinforcement learning generally because
of this information constraint you you
you can only learn one thing at a time.
Uh the density of information isn't that
high or whether it was just specific to
the way that mu0 was done. And if it's
specific to uh Alpha Zero, what what
what needed to be changed about that
approach so that it could be a general
learning agent?
>> The the idea is totally general. You
know, uh I do use all the time as my
canonical example, the idea of an AI
agent is like a person.
>> Yeah. And and people uh in some sense
they have just one world they live in
and um that world may involve chess and
it may involve Atari games. Uh but those
are are are not a different task or a
different world. Those are different
states right they encounter and so the
the general idea is not limited at all.
So maybe it would be useful to explain
what was missing in that architecture or
that that approach which this continual
learn learning AGI would have they just
set it up they didn't it was not their
ambition to have one agent across across
uh those games. If we want to talk about
transfer, we should talk about transfer
not across games or across tasks, but
transfer between states.
>> Yeah. I I guess I'm curious about
historically, have we seen the
level of transfer
using RL techniques that would be needed
to build this kind of
>> Okay, good. Good. We're not seeing
transfer anywhere. We're not seeing
general critical to good performance is
that you can generalize well from one
state to another state.
>> We don't have any methods that are good
at that. What we have are people um try
different things and they they settle on
something that that uh a representation
that that transfers well or they
generalize as well. But we have no we
don't have any automated techniques to
promote. we have very few automated
techniques to promote transfer and
they're not none of them are used in in
modern deep learning.
>> Um let me paraphrase to make sure that I
understood that correctly.
It sounds like you're saying that when
we do have generalization in these
models that is a result of some uh
sculpted
uh
>> humans did it.
>> Yeah.
>> The researchers did it because there's
no other explanation. I mean gradient
descent will not make you generalize
well it will make you solve the problem
>> right
>> it will not make you you know get new
data
you generalize in a good way
generalization means train on one thing
that affects what you do on the other
things so we know deep learning is
really bad at this for example we know
that if you train on some new thing it
will often catastrophically interfere
with all the old things that you that
you knew
>> so this is exactly bad generalization
Right
>> now generalization as I said is some
kind of influence of training on one
state on other states and generalization
is not necessarily good or bad right
just the fact that you generalize is not
necessarily good or bad you can
generalize poorly you can generalize
well
>> right
>> so you you need generalization always
will happen u but we need algorithms
that will uh cause the the
generalization to be good rather than
bad
>> I'm not trying to kickstart this uh
initial uh crux proxy, but I'm just
genuinely curious because I I think I'm
might be using the term differently. I
mean, one way to think about is these
LLMs are increasing the scope of
generalization from like earlier systems
which could not really even do a basic
math problem to now they can do anything
in this class of math Olympia type
problems, right? So, you initially start
with like they can generalize among
addition problems at least. Um uh then
you generalize to like they can
generalize among like problems which
require use of different kinds of
mathematical techniques and theorems and
you know conceptual categories which is
like what the math olympiad requires.
And so it sounds like you don't think of
that being able to solve any problem
within that category as an example of
generalization or let me know if I'm
misunderstanding that. Well, large
language models so complex. We don't we
don't really know what information they
had prior. We are we have to guess
because they've been fed so much. This
is one reason why they're not a good way
to do science. Uh it's just so
uncontrolled, so unknown.
>> But if you come up with an entirely new,
>> they're getting a bunch of things right
>> perhaps. And uh so the question is why?
Well, it may be that they don't need to
generalize to get them right because the
only way to get some of them right is is
to form something which gets all of them
right.
>> So, you know, if there's only one answer
uh then and you find it, I that's not
called generalization. It's just it's
the only way to solve it and so they
find the only way to solve it.
>> Generalization is when it could be this
way, it could been that way and they do
it the good way. My my understanding is
that they um this is working more and
more better and better with coding
agents. So engineers obviously if you're
trying to program a library
there's many different ways you could
achieve the endspec and an initial
frustration with these models has been
that they'll do it in a way that's
sloppy and then over time they're
getting better and better at coming up
with the design architecture and the
abstractions that developers find more
satisfying. And it seems that an example
of what you're talking about.
>> Well, there's nothing in them which will
cause it to generalize. Well, the
gradient descent will cause them to find
a solution to the problems they've seen.
And if there's only one way to solve
them, you know, they they'll do it. But
there are many ways to solve it. Some
which generalize well, some which
generalize poorly. There's nothing in
them in the algorithms that will cause
them to generalize well.
>> But people of course are involved. and
and you know if if it's not working out
you know they fiddle with it and until
they find a way perhaps until they find
a way which it generalizes well so to
prep for this interview I wanted to
understand the full history of RL
starting with reinforce up to current
techniques like GRPO and I didn't just
want a list of equations and algorithms
I wanted to really understand each
change in this progression and the
underlying motivation you know what was
the main problem that each successive
method was actually trying to solve. So
I had Gemini Deep Research walk me
through this entire timeline step by
step. It explained the last 20 years of
gradual innovation and explained how
each step made the Aura learning process
more stable or more sample efficient or
more scalable. I asked Deep Research to
put all of this together like an Andre
Carpathy style tutorial and it did that.
What was cool is that it combined this
whole lesson together into one coherent
cohesive document in the style that I
wanted. It was also great that it
assembled all of the best links in the
same place so that if I wanted to
understand any specific algorithm
better, I could just access the right
explainer right there. Go to
gemini.google.com
to try it out yourself. All right, back
to Richard. I want to zoom out and ask
about so being in the field of AI for
longer than almost anybody who's
commentating on it uh or working in it
now. I'm just curious about what the
biggest surprises have been. How much
new stuff you feel like is coming out or
does it feel like people are just
playing with old ideas? Um zooming out
you know you you got into this even
before like deep learning was popular.
So how do you see this trajectory of
this field over time and how new ideas
have come about and everything and
what's been surprising?
>> Okay so yeah I I I um thought a little
bit about this. There are many things or
a handful of things. Um first the large
language models are surprising. It's
surprising how how effective um neural
networks artificial neural networks are
at at language tasks. You know that that
was a surprise. Wasn't expected.
Language seemed different. So that's
impressive.
>> Um there's a longstanding controversy in
AI about uh simple basic principle
methods. uh the the general purpose
methods like search and learning and
compared to um human enabled systems uh
like symbolic methods and um uh so in
the old days it was interesting because
things like search and learning were
called weak methods because they're just
they just use general principles.
They're not using uh the power that
comes from uh imbuing a system with
human knowledge. So those are called
strong and um and so I think the weak
methods have just you know totally won
that's you know that's that's that's the
biggest um question from the old days of
AI what would happen and you know yeah
learning and search have just won the
day
>> right
>> but there's a sense which that was not
surprising to me because I was always
voting for or hoping or rooting for the
for the uh simple basic principles
>> and so Even with the large language
models, it's surprising how how well it
worked, but it was all it was all good
and gratifying. And um and things like
Alph Go, it's it's sort of surprising
how well that was able to work. Um and
Alpha Zero in particular, how well it
was able to work. Um but it's all very
gratifying because again, it's simple
basic principles are winning the day.
Have there felt like whenever the public
conception
has been changed because some new
technique was or sorry some new
application was developed for example
when Alpha Zero became this viral
sensation to you as somebody who has
literally came up with many of the
techniques that were used. Did it feel
to you like new breakthroughs were made
or does it feel like oh we've had these
techniques since the '90s and people are
simply combining them and applying them
now? So the whole alpho thing had a
precursor which is TD gam Jerry Tasaro
did exactly um reinforcement learning
temporal difference learning methods to
um to play back gam
>> right
>> and it beat the beat the world's best
players and it worked really well and so
in some sense Alpha Go was merely a
scaling up of that process but it was
quite a bit of scaling up and there was
also an additional innovation in how the
search was done,
>> right?
>> But it made sense. It wasn't surprising
in that sense. Alph Go actually didn't
use uh TD learning. It waited to see the
final outcomes. Uh but Alpha Zero used
TD uh and Alpha Zero was applied to all
the other games and did extremely well.
I was very I've always been very
impressed by the way Alpha Zero plays
chess because I'm a chess player and it
just it it was just sacrifices material
for sort of positional advantages and
it's just just content and patient to uh
sacrifice that material for a long
period of time and um so that was
surprising that it worked so well but
also gratifying and fitting into my
worldview. So, so this has led me where
I am. Where I am is I'm in some sense a
contrarian or some thinking differently
from the field is and I'm I am
personally just kind of content being
out of sync with my field for a long
period of time perhaps decades uh
because occasionally I have been proved
uh right in the past. And the other
thing I do to help me not feel I'm I'm
out of sync and thinking in a strange
way is to look not at my my local uh
environment or my local field, but to
look back in in time into history and to
see what people have thought classically
about about um about the mind in many
different fields. And I don't feel I'm
out of sync with the larger traditions.
>> I I really view myself as a classicist
rather than as a contrarian. I go to
what what the larger community of of
thinkers about the mind have always
thought.
>> Okay. Some sort of left field questions
for you if you'll tolerate them. Um so
the way I read the bitter lesson is that
it's not saying necessarily that human
artisal researcher tuning doesn't work
but that it obviously scales much worse
than compute which is growing
exponentially. And so you want
techniques which leverage a ladder.
>> Y
>> and once we have AGI, we'll have
researchers which scale linearly with
compute, right? So we'll have this
avalanche of millions of AI researchers
and their stock will be growing as fast
as uh compute. And so maybe this will
mean that it is rational or it will make
sense to have them doing good
old-fashioned AI and doing these artisal
solutions. uh does that as a vision of
what happens after AGI in terms of how
AI research will evolve. I wonder if
that's still compatible with a better
lesson.
>> Well, how did we get to this AGI and you
want to presume that it's been done?
>> So, suppose it started with general math
methods, but now we've got the AGI and
now we want to go
>> h
>> we're done.
>> Interesting. You don't think that
there's
any anything above AGI?
>> Well, but you're using it to get AGI
again. Well, I'm using it to get
superhuman levels of intelligence or
competence at different tasks.
>> So, these AGIS, if they're not
superhuman already, then the the
knowledge they might impart would be not
superhuman.
>> I guess there's different gradations of
your
>> I'm not sure this this your idea makes
sense because because it seems to
presume the existence of AGI. Uh, and
then that we've already worked that out.
>> So, maybe one way to motivate this is
Alpha Go was superhuman. um it beat any
Go player. Alpha Zero would beat Alpha
Go every single time. So there's ways to
get more superhuman than than even
superhuman
>> and it was a different architecture. And
so it seems plausible to me that
>> well the agent that's like able to
generally learn across all domains.
There would be ways to make that give it
better architecture for learning just
the same Alpha Zero was an improvement
upon Apple Go and Mu0ero was an
improvement upon Alpha Zero. And the way
alpha zero was an improvement was it did
not use the human knowledge but just
went from experience.
>> Right.
>> So why do you why do you say
>> but
>> bring in other agents expertise to teach
it when it's when it's been it's worked
so well from experience
and not by help from another agent. I
agree that in that particular case that
it was moving to more general methods,
but I meant to use that example to
illustrate that it's possible to go
superhuman to superhuman plus+ to
superhuman++.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm curious if you think those
gradations will continue to happen by
just making the method simpler or
because we'll have the capability of
these millions of minds who can then add
complexity as needed. if that will
continue to if that will continue to be
a false path even when you have billions
of AI researchers or trillions of AI
researchers.
>> I think I think more interesting is just
think about that case
>> which when you have many AIs um will
they help each other the way cultural
evolution works in people
>> and let's just maybe we should talk
about that.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> The bitter lesson. Oh, who cares about
that? That's that's an empirical
observation about a particular period in
history. 70 years in history no longer
doesn't necessarily have to apply the
next 70 years. So the interesting
question is you're an AI, you get some
more computer power. Should you use it
to make yourself, you know, more
computationally capable or should you
use it to spawn off a copy of yourself
to go learn something interesting on the
other side of the planet or on some
other topic and then report back to you?
>> Yep.
I think that's a really interesting
question
um that that that will only arise in the
age of digital intelligences.
>> I'm not sure what the answer is, but I
think it it will more questions. Will it
be possible to really, you know, spawn
it off, send it out, learn something
new, some perhaps very new, and then
will it be able to re be reinccorporated
into the original
>> or will it will it uh have will have
changed so much that it uh it can't
really be done, you know? Is that
possible or is it not? And you know, you
can carry this to its limit as I I I saw
one of your videos the other night that
that suggested that it that it could
where you spawn off many many copies, do
different things. It's highly
decentralized, but report back to the
the central master
and that this is this will be such a
powerful thing. Well, I think one thing
that uh so this is my attempt to add
something to this this view is that uh a
big question, a big issue will become uh
corruption. You know, if you if you
really could just get information from
anywhere and bring it into your central
mind, you become more and more powerful.
Uh, and since it's all digital and they
all speak some internal digital
language, maybe it'll be easy and
possible. But it will not be that easy,
as easy as you're imagining because uh
that you can lose your mind this way. If
you you pull in something from the
outside and build it into your into your
inner thinking, uh, it could take over
you. It could change you. It could be uh
your destruction rather than uh your in
increment in knowledge. M
>> I think this will become a a big
concern, you know, particularly when
you're, oh, he's figured all about, you
know, how to play some new game or
figures out he's studied Indonesia and
you want to incorporate that into your
mind. Um, yeah. So, you can't you could
you think, oh, just read it all in and
that'll be fine. But no, you've just
read a whole bunch of bits into your
mind and uh they could have viruses in
them. They could have hidden goals. uh
they can uh warp you and change you and
this will become a big thing. How do you
have cyber security in the age of
digital spawning and re reforming again?
>> It's interesting that both quant firms
and AI labs have a culture of secrecy
because both of them are operating in
incredibly competitive markets and their
success rest on protecting their IP. If
you're an AI researcher or engineer and
you're deciding where to work, most of
the quant firms or AI labs that you'll
be considering will be strongly siloing
their teams to minimize the risk of
leaks. Hudson River Trading takes the
opposite approach. Their teams openly
share their trading strategies and their
strategy code lives in a shared monor
repo. At HRT, if you're a researcher and
you have a good idea, your contribution
will be broadly deployed across all
relevant strategies. This gives your
work a ton of leverage. You'll also
learn incredibly fast. You can learn
about other people's research and ask
questions and you can see how everything
fits together end to end from the
low-level execution of trades to the
high level predictive models. HRT is
hiring. If you want to learn more, go to
hudson rivertrading.com/thearkcash.
All right, back to Richard. I guess this
brings us to the topic of AI succession.
>> Mhm. you have a perspective that's quite
different from a lot of people that I've
interviewed and maybe a lot of people
generally. So I also think it's a very
interesting perspective. I want to hear
about it.
>> Yeah. So I do think succession to
digital
or digital intelligence or augmented
humans is inevitable. So the argument go
I have a four-part argument. Now I step
one is
there's no government or organization
that that uh gives humanity a unified
point of view that dominates and that
can that can arrange. There's no
consensus about how the world should be
run. And number two um we will figure
out how intelligence works. Researchers
will figure it out eventually. And
number three we won't stop just with
human level intelligence. we will get
reach super intelligence. And number
four is that once it's inevitable over
time that the most intelligent things
around would gain resources and power.
Uh and uh so put all that together, it's
you know you um it's sort of inevitable
that you're going to have um succession
to AI or to AI enabled augmented humans.
So within those those four things seem
clear and and and sure to happen. Uh but
within that set of possibilities some
there can be good outcomes as well as
less good outcomes bad outcomes
>> and um
so I just just trying to be realistic
about where we are and and ask how we
should feel about it. Yeah, I I agree
with all four of those arguments and the
implication and I also agree that
succession
contains
a wide variety of possible futures. So,
curious to get more thoughts on that.
>> Right. And so then I do encourage people
to think um positively about it first of
all because it's something we humans
have always tried to do for thousands of
years trying to understand themselves
trying to make themselves think better
and um
you know just understand themselves. So
this is a great success from as science
humanities uh we're finding out what
this essential part of of of humanness
is what it means to be intelligent. And
then what I usually say is is that this
is all kind of human centric. What if we
look we step aside from being a human
and just say take the point of view of
the universe and and this is I think a
major stage in the universe a major
transition a transition from replicators
we humans and animals plants we're all
replicators and that gives some
strengths and some limitations and then
we're entering the age of design where
because our AIs are designed our our our
all of our physical objects are designed
our buildings are designed
our technology is designed and we're
we're designing now uh AIs things that
can be intelligent themselves and that
are themselves capable of design and so
this is this is a key step in the world
and I and in the universe and I think
it's the it's the transition from the
world in which most of the interesting
things
uh that are are replicated replicated
means you can make copies of them uh but
you don't really understand them like
right now we make more intelligent
beings, more children. Uh we don't
really understand how intelligence
works. Whereas in as we're we're
reaching now to having design
intelligence intelligence that we do
understand how it works and therefore we
can change it in different ways in
different speeds um than otherwise and
and our future they might not be
replicated at all like we may just
design AIs and those AIs will design
other AIs and um everything will be done
by design construction rather than by
replication.
Yeah, I mark this as one of the four
great stages of the universe. First
there's there's dust ends with stars.
Stars we and and then stars make planets
and the planets give rise to life. And
now we're giving life life to uh
designed entities.
And so I think we should be proud and we
should be uh uh that we are giving rise
to this great transition in the
universe.
Yeah. So it's an interesting thing. What
should we what should we consider them
part of humanity or different from
humanity? It's our choice. It's our
choice whether we should say oh they are
our offspring and we should be proud of
them and we should celebrate their
achievements or we should we could say
oh no they're not us and we should be
horrified. It's it's just it's
interesting that that that is it feels
to me like a choice and yet it's such a
strongly uh held thing that how could we
be a choice? I like these sort of
contradictory uh implications of
thought.
>> It would be interesting to consider if
we were just designing another
generation of humans.
>> Yes,
>> design is the wrong word. But we knew a
future generation was a good humans
going to come up and forget about AI. We
just know in the long run humanity will
be more capable and maybe more numerous,
maybe more intelligent. How do we feel
about that? I do think there's potential
worlds with future humans that we would
be quite concerned about. So are you
thinking like maybe we are we are like
the Neanderthalss we give rise to Homo
sapiens maybe homo sapiens will give
rise to a new group of people
>> something like that like I'm basically
taking the example you're giving of like
okay even if you consider them part of
humanity yeah
>> I don't think that re necessarily means
that we should feel super comfortable
>> yeah like Nazis were humans right if we
thought like oh the future generation
will be Nazis I think we'd be like quite
concerned about just handing off power
to them So, um, I agree that this is not
super dissimilar to worrying about more
capable future humans, but I don't think
that that addresses a lot of the
concerns people might have about this
level of power being attained this fast
with entities we don't fully understand.
>> Well, I think it's relevant to point out
that uh for most of humanity
um they don't have much uh influence on
what happens. Um, most of humanity
doesn't influence
>> who can control the atom bombs or who uh
controls the nation states. Even as a as
a citizen, I often feel that we don't
control the nation states very much.
They're out of control. A lot of it has
to do with just how you feel about
change. Um, and if you think the current
situation is really really good, then
you're uh more likely to be suspicious
of change and averse to change than if
you think um
it's imperfect. And I think it's
imperfect. In fact, I think it's pretty
bad.
>> So, I'm I'm I'm open to change. I I
think humanity is not in a has had a
good super good track record. And maybe
it's the best thing that there's been,
but it it it's far from perfect.
>> Yeah, I guess there's different
varieties of change. Um, the industrial
revolution was change. The bullshik
revolution was also change. And if you
were around in Russia in the 1900s and
you're like, look, things aren't going
well. This is our is kind of messing
things up. We need change. I'd want to
know what kind of change you wanted
before signing on the dotted line.
Right? And then similar with AI where
I'd want to understand and to the extent
it's possible to change the trajectory
to change the trajectory of AI such that
the change is positive um for humans.
>> We we are we should be concerned about
our future the future make we should try
to make it good. Um, we al also though
should recognize the limits, our limits.
And we're
I think we want to avoid the feeling of
entitlement. Avoid the feeling, oh, we
are here first. We should always have it
in a good way. Um, how should we think
about the future and how much control uh
a particular species on a particular
planet should have over it? Uh, and how
much control do we have? You know, a a
counterbalance to our limited control
over the long-term future of humanity
should be how much control do we have
over our own lives? Like we have uh our
own goals and we have our our families
and we those things are much more
controllable than like trying to control
um the whole universe,
>> right? Um so I think it's appropriate
you know for us to to uh you know really
work towards our own local goals and uh
and it's kind of aggressive for us
saying oh the future has to evolve this
way that I want it to.
>> Sure.
>> Because then we'll have arguments like
different people think the future the
global future should evolve in different
ways and then they have conflict and
>> yeah avoid that. Maybe a bit a good
analogy here would be okay so suppose
you're raising your own children
>> it might not be appropriate to have
extremely tight goals for their own life
or also have some sense of like I want
my children to go out there in the world
and have this specific impact you know
my my son's going to become president
and my daughter's going to become CEO of
Intel and like together they're going to
have this effect on the world um but it
people do have the sense and I think
this is appropriate of saying, "I'm
going to give them good, robust values
such that if and when they do end up in
positions of power, they do reasonable
pro-social things." And I think maybe a
similar attitude towards AI makes sense.
Not in the sense of we can predict
everything that they will do. Um where
we have this plan about what the world
should look like in 100 years but it's
quite important to give them
robust and steerable and pro-social
values.
>> Pro-social values.
>> Maybe that's the wrong word.
>> Are there universal values that we can
all agree on?
>> I don't think so. But that doesn't
prevent us from uh giving our kids a
good education, right? Like we have some
sense of we want our children to be a
certain way.
>> Yeah.
>> And maybe process is the wrong word.
Actually, high integrity is a maybe a
better word where if there's a request
or if there's a goal that seems harmful,
they will refuse to engage in it. Um or
they'll be honest. Um things like that.
and we have some sense that we can teach
our children things like this even if we
don't have some sense of what true
morality is or everybody doesn't agree
on that. Um, and maybe that's a
reasonable target for AI as well.
>> So, so you're saying we're trying to
design the future and the the principles
by which it will evolve and come into
being,
>> right?
>> And so you're saying the first thing
you're saying is well we will we try to
teach our our children um general
principles which will promote
more likely evolutions.
>> Yeah.
>> Um maybe we should also seek for things
being voluntary. If there is change, we
want it to be voluntary rather than
imposed on people.
>> I think that's a very important point.
>> Y
>> um and yeah, that's all good. I think I
think this is like a big um you know,
the big the big or one of the really big
human enterprises to design society and
that's been ongoing for for thousands of
years again. And so so it's like the
more things change really the more
things they stay the same. We still have
to figure out how to be uh the children
will still come up with different values
that seem strange to their parents and
their grandparents and uh and things
will evolve. the the more things change,
the more they stay the same. Also seems
like a good capstone to the AI
discussion because the AI discussion we
were having was about how techniques
which were um invented even before their
application to deep learning and back
propagation was evident have are you
know central to the progression of AI
today. So maybe that's a good place to
wrap up the conversation.
>> Okay, thank you very much.
>> Thank you for coming on.
>> My pleasure.